Add pipelining API documentation (#226)
SpinalHDL/SpinalDoc-RTD: source/SpinalHDL/Libraries/Pipeline/introduction.rst

Introduction
============

spinal.lib.misc.pipeline provide a pipelining API. The main advantages over manual pipelining are : 

- You don't have to pre define data structure with all the element which goes through each individual stage
- You can compose the pipeline (as a consequence of the above point)
- Manual retiming is much easier, as you don't have to handle the registers / arbitration manualy
- Manage the arbitration by itself

The API is composed of 4 main things : 

- Node : which represent a layer in the pipeline
- Connector : which allows to connect nodes to each others
- Builder : which will generate the hardware required for a whole pipeline
- Stageable : which represent a data thing that you can retrieve Nodes the pipeline 

> It is important to understande that Stageable isn't a hardware data instance, but a key to retrieve a data along the pipeline on nodes.

Reviewer: is PipeSignal a good choice？

> It is important to understande that Stageable isn't a hardware data instance, but a key to retrieve a data along the pipeline on nodes.

Reviewer: or NodeStreamPayload？

> It is important to understande that Stageable isn't a hardware data instance, but a key to retrieve a data along the pipeline on nodes.

Reviewer: or NodeStreamPayload？

> It is important to understande that Stageable isn't a hardware data instance, but a key to retrieve a data along the pipeline on nodes.

Author: PipeSignal is kinda of missleading, because a Signal should be a unique thing, while in our case it can be multiple instance through the pipeline.
NodeStreamPayload is too verbose i would say.

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val PC = Stageable(UInt(32 bits))
    val PC_PLUS_4 = Stageable(UInt(32 bits))

    val n0, n1 = Node()
    val s01 = StageConnector(n0, n1)

    n0(PC) := 0x42
    n1(PC_PLUS_4) := n1(PC) + 4

Note that I got used to name the Stageable instances using uppercase. This is to make it very explicit that the thing isn't a hardware signal, but are more like a "key" to access things.

Node
============

Node mostly host the valid/ready arbitration signal, and the hardware signal required for all the Stageable values going through it.

You can access its arbitration via :

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 1 5

   * - API
     - Description
   * - node.valid
     - Is the signal which specify if a transaction is present on the node
   * - node.ready
     - Is the signal which specify if the node transaction can move away.
   * - node.isValid
     - node.valid's read only accessor
   * - node.isReady
     - node.ready's read only accessor
   * - node.isFiring

>      - True when the node transaction is successfuly moving futher (isValid && isReady && !isRemoved). Usefull to commit state changes

Author: So, in Vex and Nax and steam, isFireing is alwas valid && read, meaning 
cycle 0 => valid 1 ready 1  => isFireing 1

About clearing state, there is the isMoving

Generaly i do things like that : 

```scala
val beatCounter = Reg(UInt(4 bits)) init(0)

when(isFiring){
  beatCounter := beatCounter + 1
}

when(isMoving && lastCycleOfBurst){
   beatCounter := 0
}
```

I kinda avoid cleaning the state of things the cycle after the last beat of a multi cycle operation.

   * - node.isMoving

>      - True when the node transaction is moving (isValid && (isReady || isRemoved)). Usefull to "reset" states

Author: We can add hadMoved to specify if things changed the previous cycle (not sure how to write it)

   * - node.isRemoved

>      - True when the node is being flushed

Reviewer 2: This is visible this cycle, when this stage has been earmarked to be flushed at the end of the current cycle.  At the next advancement of data (for example at the next cycle) this will cause the signal data in this stage to be discarded and the isValid for the next stage to be made inactive.  Thus deactivating/discarding the data present in this stage at this time.

You can access its stageable's signals via : 

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - API
     - Description
   * - node(Stageable)
     - Return the corresponding hardware signal
   * - node(Stageable, Any)
     - Same as above, but include a second argument which is used as a "secondary key". This ease the construction of multi lane hardware. For instance, when you have a multi issue CPU pipeline, you can use the lane Int id as secondary key
   * - node.insert(Data)
     - Return a new Stageable instance which is connected to the given Data hardware signal

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val n0, n1 = Node()

    val PC = Stageable(UInt(32 bits))
    n0(PC) := 0x42
    n0(PC, "true") := 0x42
    n0(PC, 0x666) := 0xEE
    val SOMETHING = n0.insert(myHardwareSignal) //This create a new Stageable
    when(n1(SOMETHING) === 0xFFAA){ ... }
    

Also, there is an API to define nodes which are always valid / ready 

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - API
     - Description
   * - node.setAlwaysValid()

>      - Specify that the valid signal of the given node is always True. To use on the first node of a pipeline

Reviewer 2: Is it really true that the first node in the pipeline would use `setAlwaysValid()`  At there description where you might not have a design that does this ?   Should a disabled via debugger of CPU IF stage modulate this state ?

Author: > Is it really true that the first node in the pipeline would use setAlwaysValid()

It can, it is equivalent to always doing node.valid := True

> At there description where you might not have a design that does this ?

When a design isn't always active, or when it is starving data (bubble)

> Should a disabled via debugger of CPU IF stage modulate this state ?

a disabled ?

   * - node.setAlwaysReady()
     - Specify that the ready signal of the given node is always True. To use on the last node of a pipeline, usefull if you don't have to implement backpresure.

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val n0, n1, n2 = Node()
    val OUT = Stageable(UInt(16 bits))

    val outputFlow = master Flow(UInt(16 bits))
    outputFlow.valid := n2.valid
    outputFlow.payload := n2(OUT)
    n2.setAlwaysReady() // Equivalent to n2.ready := True, but also notify the pipeline elaboration about it, leading to eventual optimisations

While you can manualy drive/read the arbitration/data of the first/last stage of your pipeline, there is a few utilities to connect its boundaries.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 5 5

   * - API
     - Description
   * - node.arbitrateFrom(Stream[T]])
     - Drive a node arbitration from a stream.
   * - node.arbitrateFrom(Flow[T]])
     - Drive a node arbitration from the Flow. 
   * - node.arbitrateTo(Stream[T]])
     - Drive a stream arbitration from the node. 
   * - node.arbitrateTo(Flow[T]])
     - Drive a Flow arbitration from the node. 
   * - node.driveFrom(Stream[T]])((Node, T) => Unit)

>      - Drive a node from a stream. The provided landa function can be use to connect the data

Reviewer 2: lambda

   * - node.driveFrom(Flow[T]])((Node, T) => Unit)
     - Same as above but for Flow
   * - node.driveTo(Stream[T]])((T, Node) => Unit)

>      - Drive a stream from the node. The provided landa function can be use to connect the data

Reviewer 2: lambda

   * - node.driveTo(Flow[T]])((T, Node) => Unit)
     - Same as above but for Flow

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val n0, n1, n2 = Node()

    val IN = Stageable(UInt(16 bits))
    val OUT = Stageable(UInt(16 bits))

    n1(OUT) := n1(IN) + 0x42

    // Define the input / output stream that will be later connected to the pipeline
    val up = slave Stream(UInt(16 bits))
    val down = master Stream(UInt(16 bits)) //Note master Stream(OUT) is good aswell

    n0.driveFrom(up)((self, payload) => self(IN) := payload)
    n2.driveTo(down)((payload, self) => payload := self(OUT))

> In order to reduce verbosity, there is a set of implicit convertions between stageable toward their data representation which can be used when you are in the context of a Node : 

Reviewer 2: conversions

.. code-block:: scala

    val VALUE = Stageable(UInt(16 bits))
    val n1 = new Node{
        val PLUS_ONE = insert(VALUE + 1) // VALUE is implicitly converted into its n1(VALUE) representation
    }

> You can also use those implicit convertions by importing them : 

Reviewer 2: conversions

.. code-block:: scala

    val VALUE = Stageable(UInt(16 bits))
    val n1 = Node()

    val n1Stuff = new Area {
        import n1._
        val PLUS_ONE = insert(VALUE) + 1 // Equivalent to n1.insert(n1(VALUE)) + 1
    }

> There is also an API which alows you to create new Area which provide the whole API of a given node instance (including implicit convertion) without import : 

Reviewer 2: conversion :)

.. code-block:: scala

    val n1 = Node()
    val VALUE = Stageable(UInt(16 bits))

    val n1Stuff = new n1.Area{
        val PLUS_ONE = insert(VALUE) + 1 // Equivalent to n1.insert(n1(VALUE)) + 1
    }

> Such feature is very usefull when you have parametrable pipelines locations for your hardware (see retiming example).

Reviewer 2: useful
parametrizable pipeline locations

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val c01 = CtrlConnector(n0, n1)

    c01.haltWhen(something)
    when(somethingElse){
        c01.haltIt()
    }

You can retrieve which node are connected using node.up / node.down.

The CtrlConnector also provide an API to access stageable :

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - API
     - Description
   * - connector(Stageable)
     - Same as connector.down(Stageable)
   * - connector(Stageable, Any)
     - Same as connector.down(Stageable, Any)
   * - connector.insert(Data)
     - Same as connector.down.insert(Data)
   * - connector.bypass(Stageable)
     - Allows to conditionaly override a stageable value between connector.up -> connector.down. This can be used to fix data hazard in CPU pipelines for instance.

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val c01 = CtrlConnector(n0, n1)

    val PC = Stageable(UInt(32 bits))
    c01(PC) := 0x42
    c01(PC, 0x666) := 0xEE

    val DATA = Stageable(UInt(32 bits))
    // Let's say Data is inserted in the pipeline before c01
    when(hazard){
        c01.bypass(DATA) := fixedValue
    }
    
    // c01(DATA) and below will get the hazard patch

> Note that if you create a CtrlConnector without node arguements, it will create its own nodes internaly.

Reviewer 2: arguments

internally

.. code-block:: scala

    val decode = CtrlConnector()
    val execute = CtrlConnector()

    val d2e = StageConnector(decode.down, execute.up)

Other connectors
------------------------------------

There is also a JoinConnector / ForkConnector implemented.

Your custom connector
------------------------------------

You can implement your custom connectors by implementing the Connector base class.

.. code-block:: scala

    trait Connector extends Area{
      def ups : Seq[Node]
      def downs : Seq[Node]

      def propagateDown(): Unit
      def propagateUp(): Unit
      def build() : Unit
    }

Builder
============

To generate the hardware of your pipeline, you need to give a list of all the connectors used in your pipeline.

.. code-block:: scala

      // Let's define 3 Nodes for our pipeline
      val n0, n1, n2 = Node()

      // Let's connect those nodes by using simples registers
      val s01 = StageConnector(n0, n1)
      val s12 = StageConnector(n1, n2)

      // Let's ask the builder to generate all the required hardware
      Builder(s01, s12)

There is also a set of "all in one" builders that you can instanciate to help yourself. 

> For instance there is the NodesBuilder class which can be used to create sequencialy staged pipelines : 

Reviewer 2: sequentially

    }

SignalKey
============

SignalKey class can be instanciated to represent some data which can go through the pipeline. Technicaly speaking, SignalKey is a HardType which has a name and is used as a "key" to retrieve stuff.

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val PC = SignalKey(UInt(32 bits))
    val PC_PLUS_4 = SignalKey(UInt(32 bits))

    val n0, n1 = Node()
    val s01 = StageConnector(n0, n1)

    n0(PC) := 0x42
    n1(PC_PLUS_4) := n1(PC) + 4

Note that I got used to name the SignalKey instances using uppercase. This is to make it very explicit that the thing isn't a hardware signal, but are more like a "key/type" to access things.

Node
============

Node mostly host the valid/ready arbitration signal, and the hardware signal required for all the SignalKey values going through it.

You can access its arbitration via :

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 1 10

   * - API
     - Access
     - Description
   * - node.valid
     - RW
     - Is the signal which specify if a transaction is present on the node. It is driven by the upstream. Once asserted, it can only be dropped the cycle after which ready is high or node.isRemoved.
   * - node.ready
     - RW

>      - Is the signal which specify if the node's transaction should move away. It is driven by the downstream to create backpresure. The signal has no meaning when there is no transaction (node.valid being deasserted)

Author: > node's output

In some ways "node's output" isn't precise. Also the API isn't realy stage centric anymore
what's about : 
"specifies if the node's transaction can proceed downstream " ?

   * - node.isValid
     - RO
     - node.valid's read only accessor
   * - node.isReady
     - RO
     - node.ready's read only accessor
   * - node.isFiring
     - RO
     - True when the node transaction is successfuly moving futher (isValid && isReady && !isRemoved). Useful to commit state changes.
   * - node.isMoving
     - RO

>      - True when the node transaction is moving away from the node (will not be in the node anymore starting from the next cycle),

Author: isMoving is also true when valid && !ready && isRemoved, so by moving away, i meant that it may moved downstream, but it may aswel move into void land.

       either because downstream is ready to take the transaction,
       either because the transaction is removed/flushed from the while pipeline. (isValid && (isReady || isRemoved)). Useful to "reset" states.
   * - node.isRemoved
     - RO
     - True when the node is being marked to be removed/flushed. Meaning that it will not appear anywhere in the pipeline in future cycles.

> Note that the node.valid/node.ready signals follows the same conventions than the Stream's ones.

Author: Yes

Here is a list of arbitration cases you can have on a node. valid/ready/isRemoved define the state we are in, while isFiring/isMoving result of those :

+-------+-------+-----------+------------------------------+----------+----------+
| valid | ready | isRemoved | Description                  | isFiring | isMoving |
+=======+=======+===========+==============================+==========+==========+

> |   0   |   X   |     0     | No transaction               |    0     |    0     |

Author: Ahhh yes, you are right, it is X

      val io = new Bundle{
        val up = slave Stream(Vec.fill(lanesCount)(UInt(16 bits))) 
        val down = master Stream(Vec.fill(lanesCount)(UInt(16 bits)))
      }

      // Let's define 3 Nodes for our pipeline
      val n0, n1, n2 = Node()

      // Let's connect those nodes by using simples registers
      val s01 = StageConnector(n0, n1)
      val s12 = StageConnector(n1, n2)

      // Let's bind io.up to n0
      n0.arbitrateFrom(io.up)
      val LANES_INPUT = io.up.payload.map(n0.insert(_))

      // Let's use our "reusable" Plus3 area to generate each processing lane
      val lanes = for(i <- 0 until lanesCount) yield new PLus3(LANES_INPUT(i), n0, n1, n2)

      // Let's bind n2 to io.down
      n2.arbitrateTo(io.down)
      for(i <- 0 until lanesCount) io.down.payload(i) := n2(lanes(i).THREE)

      // Let's ask the builder to generate all the required hardware
      Builder(s01, s12)
    }

This will produce the following data path (assuming lanesCount = 2), abitration not being shown :

.. image:: /asset/image/pipeline/composable_lanes.png
   :scale: 70 %

Retiming / Variable lenth
================================================

> Sometime you want to design a pipeline, but you don't realy know where will be the critical paths / right balance between stages, and you can't realy rely on the synthesis tool doing a good job with automatic retiming.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sometime you want to design a pipeline, but you don't really know where the critical paths will be and what the right balance between stages is. And often you can't rely on the synthesis tool doing a good job with automatic retiming.
```

> So, you kind of need a easy way to move around the logic of your pipeline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, you kind of need a easy way to move the logic of your pipeline around.
```

    class RgbToSomething(addAt : Int,
                         invAt : Int,
                         mulAt : Int,
                         resultAt : Int) extends Component {

      val io = new Bundle {
        val up = slave Stream(spinal.lib.graphic.Rgb(8, 8, 8))
        val down = master Stream (UInt(16 bits))
      }

      // Let's define the Nodes for our pipeline
      val nodes = Array.fill(resultAt+1)(Node())

      // Let's specify which node will be used for what part of the pipeline
      val insertNode = nodes(0)
      val addNode = nodes(addAt)
      val invNode = nodes(invAt)
      val mulNode = nodes(mulAt)
      val resultNode = nodes(resultAt)

      // Define the hardware which will feed the io.up stream into the pipeline
      val inserter = new insertNode.Area {
        arbitrateFrom(io.up)
        val RGB = insert(io.up.payload)
      }

      // sum the r g b values of the color
      val adder = new addNode.Area {
        val SUM = insert(inserter.RGB.r + inserter.RGB.g + inserter.RGB.b)
      }

      // flip all the bit of the RGB sum
      val inverter = new invNode.Area {
        val INV = insert(~adder.SUM)
      }

>       // multiplie the inverted bits with 0xEE

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      // multiply the inverted bits with 0xEE
```

          nodes_1_ready = 1'b1;
        end
      end

      assign when_StageConnector_l56_1 = (! nodes_2_valid);
      always @(*) begin
        nodes_2_ready = nodes_3_ready;
        if(when_StageConnector_l56_2) begin
          nodes_2_ready = 1'b1;
        end
      end

      assign when_StageConnector_l56_2 = (! nodes_3_valid);
      always @(posedge clk or posedge reset) begin
        if(reset) begin
          nodes_1_valid <= 1'b0;
          nodes_2_valid <= 1'b0;
          nodes_3_valid <= 1'b0;
        end else begin
          if(nodes_0_ready) begin
            nodes_1_valid <= nodes_0_valid;
          end
          if(nodes_1_ready) begin
            nodes_2_valid <= nodes_1_valid;
          end
          if(nodes_2_ready) begin
            nodes_3_valid <= nodes_2_valid;
          end
        end
      end

      always @(posedge clk) begin
        if(nodes_0_ready) begin
          nodes_1_adder_SUM <= nodes_0_adder_SUM;
        end
        if(nodes_1_ready) begin
          nodes_2_inverter_INV <= nodes_1_inverter_INV;
        end
        if(nodes_2_ready) begin
          nodes_3_multiplier_MUL <= nodes_2_multiplier_MUL;
        end
      end

    endmodule

> Also, you can easily tweek how many stages and where you want the processing to be done, for instance you may want to move the invertion hardware in the same stage as the adder. This can be done the following way : 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Also, you can easily tweak how many stages and where you want the processing to be done, for instance you may want to move the inversion hardware in the same stage as the adder. This can be done the following way : 
```

+-------+-------+-----------+------------------------------+----------+----------+
|   1   |   X   |     1     | Canceled                     |    0     |    1     |
+-------+-------+-----------+------------------------------+----------+----------+

Note that if you want to model things like for instance a CPU stage which can block and flush stuff, take a look a the CtrlLink, as it provides the API to do such things.

You can access signals referenced by a Payload via: 

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - API
     - Description
   * - node(Payload)
     - Return the corresponding hardware signal
   * - node(Payload, Any)
     - Same as above, but include a second argument which is used as a "secondary key". This eases the construction of multi-lane hardware. For instance, when you have a multi issue CPU pipeline, you can use the lane Int id as secondary key
   * - node.insert(Data)
     - Return a new Payload instance which is connected to the given Data hardware signal

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val n0, n1 = Node()

    val PC = Payload(UInt(32 bits))
    n0(PC) := 0x42

>     n0(PC, "true") := 0x42

Author: Yes
n0_PC
n0_PC_true

    n0(PC, 0x666) := 0xEE
    val SOMETHING = n0.insert(myHardwareSignal) //This create a new Payload
    when(n1(SOMETHING) === 0xFFAA){ ... }
    

Also, there is an API to define nodes which are always valid / ready 

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - API
     - Description

>    * - node.setAlwaysValid()

Author: It isn't realy the same use case.
setAlwaysValid isn't just valid := True, but also mean that the valid signal is always high in a static way, will never be False ever.
while setIdle is used to provide a value which can be overriden.

Still any sugestion for better API name is welcome :D

        import n1._
        val PLUS_ONE = insert(VALUE) + 1 // Equivalent to n1.insert(n1(VALUE)) + 1
    }

There is also an API which alows you to create new Area which provide the whole API of a given node instance (including implicit convertion) without import : 

.. code-block:: scala

    val n1 = Node()
    val VALUE = Payload(UInt(16 bits))

    val n1Stuff = new n1.Area{
        val PLUS_ONE = insert(VALUE) + 1 // Equivalent to n1.insert(n1(VALUE)) + 1
    }

Such feature is very useful when you have parametrizable pipeline locations for your hardware (see retiming example).

Links
============

There is few different Links already implemented (but you could also create your own custom one).
The idea of Links is to connect two nodes together in various ways.
They generally have a `up` Node and a `down` Node.

DirectLink
------------------

Very simple, it connect two nodes with wires only. Here is an example : 

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val c01 = DirectLink(n0, n1)

StageLink
------------------

This connect two nodes using registers on the data / valid signals and some arbitration on the ready.

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val c01 = StageLink(n0, n1)

> S2mLink

Author: Sure, this can be added as an tool on the top of the existing API. I didn't focussed much on that part of things yet

------------------

This connect two nodes using registers on the ready signal, which can be useful to improve backpresure combinatorial timings.

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val c01 = S2mLink(n0, n1)

CtrlLink
------------------

This is kind of a special Link, as connect two nodes with optional flow control / bypass logic. Its API should be flexible enough to implement a CPU stage with it.

Here is its flow control API (The Bool arguments enable the features) :

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 2 5

   * - API
     - Description
   * - haltWhen(Bool)
     - Allows to block the current transaction (clear up.ready down.valid)
   * - throwWhen(Bool)

>      - Allows to cancel the current transaction from the pipeline (clear down.valid and c the transaction driver)

Author: Right, i will push a fix

   * - forgetOneWhen(Bool)

>      - Allows to request the upstream to forget the current transaction  (but doesn't clear the down.valid)

Author: yes, i'm replacing "the current" by "its current"

>    * - ignoreReadyWhen(Bool)

Author: forgetOneWhen ?
It will not hang anything, just make the upstream transaction driver "forget" about its current state.
That's a light weight to flush / remove something from the pipeline without having to manipulate the ready wire

>    * - ignoreReadyWhen(Bool)

Reviewer: > forgetOneWhen ? It will not hang anything, just make the upstream transaction driver "forget" about its current state. That's a light weight to flush / remove something from the pipeline without having to manipulate the ready wire

i mean the ignoreReadyWhen

>    * - ignoreReadyWhen(Bool)

Author: Ahhh. it is to fire the upstream.
It doesn't hang downstream

Its usage is to implement some logic to flush / remove elements of a pipeline.
You can do that for instance by combining ignoreReadyWhen and terminateWhen

     - Allows to ignore the downstream ready (set up.ready)
   * - duplicateWhen(Bool)

>      - Allows to duplicate the current transaction (clear up.ready)

Author: Yes, it alows the transaction to eventualy duplicate downstream while holding a copy in the current node.

   * - terminateWhen(Bool)
     - Allows to hide the current transaction from downstream (clear down.valid)

Also note that if you want to do flow control in a conditional scope (ex in a when statement), you can call the following functions :

- haltIt(), duplicateIt(), terminateIt(), forgetOneNow(), ignoreReadyNow(), throwIt()

.. code-block:: scala
    
    val c01 = CtrlLink(n0, n1)

    c01.haltWhen(something)
    when(somethingElse){

>         c01.haltIt()

Author: Sure
